One Small Step with Fingerprints, One Giant Leap for
De Novo Molecule Generation from Mass Spectra

arXiv:2508.04180v4 [cs.LG] 3 Nov 2025

Neng Kai Nigel Neo
nnengkai@dso.org.sg

Lim Jing

Koh Xue Ting Serene

Ngoui Yong Zhau Preston

Shen Bingquan
SBingqua@dso.org.sg

DSO National Laboratories
Singapore

Abstract
A common approach to the de novo molecular generation problem from mass
spectra involves a two-stage pipeline: (1) encoding mass spectra into molecular
fingerprints, followed by (2) decoding these fingerprints into molecular structures.
In our work, we adopt MIST [5] as the encoder and M OL F ORGE [16] as the
decoder, leveraging additional training data to enhance performance. We also
threshold the probabilities of each fingerprint bit to focus on the presence of
substructures. This results in a tenfold improvement over previous state-of-the-art
methods, generating top-1 31% / top-10 40% of molecular structures correctly
from mass spectra in MassSpecGym [2]. We position this as a strong baseline for
future research in de novo molecule elucidation from mass spectra.

1

Introduction

Mass spectrometry (MS) is a foundational technique in analytical chemistry, widely employed for the
structural characterisation of small molecules. MS analysis has been used in monitoring reaction intermediates in catalytic cycles and characterising degradation products that govern material longevity.
However, the interpretation of mass spectra to elucidate the structure of unknown compounds remains
a significant bottleneck, requiring extensive domain knowledge and time-consuming manual effort.
Automated solutions to this problem, known as de novo molecule generation from mass spectra, have
been proposed over the years. One general approach uses a two-stage pipeline of (1) encoding mass
spectra into molecular fingerprints (FP), followed by (2) decoding these fingerprints into molecular
structures [1]. Hence, choosing appropriate encoders and decoders is important.
Previous approaches utilising this pipeline suffer from poor performance due to the dependency of
the fingerprint decoder on the fingerprints generated by the mass spectra encoder. Every bit that the
encoder is unsure of leads to compounding errors when using the decoder.
Our core idea lies in choosing the right decoder that mitigates the weaknesses above. Since fingerprints
represent the presence and absence of substructures in a molecule, we focus on capturing only present
substructures, making it easier for the model to piece together the overall structure. Additionally, a
decoder that uses the transformer architecture would be able to scale well with more training data.
These two points can be met by using M OL F ORGE [16] as the decoder. Our overall pipeline is shown
in Figure 1.
Our key contributions are:
• We chose MIST [5] for spectrum-to-fingerprint encoding with M OL F ORGE [16] decoder
for our two-stage pipeline for de novo molecular structure generation from mass spectra.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025) Workshop: AI4Mat.

Figure 1: Our proposed pipeline of using MIST as a mass spectrum encoder, thresholding the fingerprint, and
using M OL F ORGE as a fingerprint decoder for the de novo molecule generation problem.

• We demonstrate that training the fingerprint-to-structure decoder on a larger dataset with
varying chemical domains significantly enhances generalisation and structure recovery, even
when fingerprint similarity to ground truth is moderate.
• Our method outperforms previous state-of-the-art by an order of magnitude, achieving 31%
top-1 and 40% top-10 structure generation accuracy on the MassSpecGym [2] dataset.

2

Problem Statement & Definitions

We adopt the problem definition and metrics (top-k accuracy, Maximum Common Edge Subgraph
(MCES) and Tanimoto similarity) for de novo molecule generation from MassSpecGym [2]. Further
details can be found in Appendix A. Importantly, as this problem is de novo in nature, algorithms
attempting to solve this problem need to generate molecular structures without any reference libraries.

3

Methodology

Our current method utilises a combination of existing models. We show how we have adapted these
models to form a pipeline to solve the de novo molecule generation problem. These models (MIST,
M OL F ORGE) have open source implementations available. Details can be found in Appendix B.
3.1

Mass Spectra Encoder

We use the pretrained MIST models from
D IFF MS. The MIST model was trained on
MassSpecGym to predict molecular fingerprints
from mass spectra, where each peak is annotated with possible chemical formulae by an
automated annotation program. We refer the
reader to Section 3.3 of the D IFF MS paper for
technical details. In short, each peak in the mass
spectra is encoded via a chemical formula transformer, then passed to a module that outputs the
predicted fingerprint.
Figure 2: False positive and negative bits across differ3.2

Fingerprint Decoder

ent threshold values when applied to MIST fingerprints.

M OL F ORGE [16] is an autoregressive transformer model that predicts molecular structure from
fingerprints. Specifically, it takes in the on-bits of a fingerprint (bits that have a value of ‘1’) to predict
a SMILES string that represents the molecular structure. This is done using an encoder-decoder
model that generates a mapping of indices for the encoder and a mapping of tokens (representing
atoms, parenthesis, and other symbols in SMILES strings) for the decoder.
M OL F ORGE takes the indices of on-bits of the molecular fingerprint as input. However, MIST
generates fingerprints as probabilities, real values between 0 to 1. As such, we set a threshold t and
use all indices of bits ≥ t as input to M OL F ORGE. We investigate two different threshold values: a
fixed value t = 0.5, and in Section 4.4 a prior-adjusted threshold which assumes that the distribution
2

Table 1: De novo structural elucidation performance on MassSpecGym [2] dataset, across accuracy
(Acc), MCES edit distance (MCES) and Tanimoto similarity of fingerprints (Tanimoto). For our
pipeline (MIST+MolForge), we used a fixed threshold t of 0.5 and a prior-adjusted threshold value of
0.172, indicated by *.
Top-1

Top-10

Model

Acc. ↑

MCES ↓

Tanimoto ↑

Acc. ↑

MCES ↓

Tanimoto ↑

MADGEN
DiffMS
MIST+MolForge, t=0.5
*MIST+MolForge, t=0.172

1.31%
2.30%
28.27%
30.97%

27.47
18.45
14.72
12.38

0.20
0.28
0.64
0.68

1.54%
4.25%
36.11%
40.04%

16.84
14.73
10.69
8.63

0.26
0.39
0.70
0.74

of on-bits in the training set is similar to that of the test set. Specifically, we choose t such that the
proportion of logits thresholded to 1 is equal to the overall proportion of on-bits in the ground truth
fingerprints of the training set, and we then apply this threshold to the test set logits. As shown in
Figure 2, this prior-adjusted threshold can be calculated without any data leakage from the test set,
and still results in a good balance of false positive and negative bits when compared to the ground
truth fingerprints.
MassSpecGym only contains a limited number of molecules in the dataset (∼17k), as there are
multiple mass spectra for the same molecule. Thus, there is a need for further training such that
M OL F ORGE has more data to learn the decoding process. We train M OL F ORGE with the same
dataset used in D IFF MS and its baselines, which contains ∼3M compounds and does not include any
molecules in the test set. M OL F ORGE was trained to take in 4096-bit fingerprints as the pretrained
MIST models generate fingerprints with a length of 4096 bits.
To generate the top-k molecular predictions, M OL F ORGE employs a beam search decoding strategy.
At each decoding step, the model expands the most probable partial SMILES sequences by selecting
the top-ranked token continuations according to the cumulative log-probability of each sequence.
The search proceeds iteratively until complete SMILES strings are formed, after which the top-k
highest probability sequences are retained as final outputs.
3.3

Datasets

We use MassSpecGym [2] to test our pipeline. For training on additional compounds, we refer to the
combined dataset that is made available in D IFF MS [1], which corresponds to data from DSSTox [3],
HMDB [19], COCONUT [14], and MOSES [13] datasets. This results in about 2.8 million unique
compounds, and we use this dataset as additional training for M OL F ORGE.

4

Results and Discussion

4.1

De novo molecule generation

The primary results of our model pipeline on the de novo molecular generation task are shown in
Table 1. We benchmark our pipeline against the state-of-the-art D IFF MS model, along with other
established baselines reported in prior work. Our approach yields a significant performance gain,
achieving an approximately 10-fold increase in exact structure match accuracy when M OL F ORGE
is used as the fingerprint-to-structure decoder. Furthermore, the Tanimoto similarity between the
predicted and ground truth molecular fingerprints show good agreement. The Maximum Common
Edge Substructure (MCES) metric also shows a reduction in the number of extra atoms required to
form a common graph between predicted and reference molecules, implying that predicted structures
are more similar to the ground truth structure compared to other methods.
4.2

Performance of MIST as mass spectra encoder

As we have utilised the same pretrained MIST model from the D IFF MS paper, we refer the reader
to Section 4.4 of the D IFF MS paper. D IFF MS has also conducted an ablation study, showing that
pretraining MIST results in improved performance compared to without pretraining MIST.
3

Table 2: Performance of M OL F ORGE on different training datasets and the input fingerprint (FP)
used. Additional training data leads to improved performance for M OL F ORGE. We also compare
ground truth fingerprints, generated directly from the ground truth structure, with fingerprints from
MIST (t = 0.172), which are predicted from the corresponding mass spectra.
Top-1

Top-10

MolForge training dataset

Input FP

Acc. ↑

Tanimoto ↑

Acc. ↑

Tanimoto ↑

Combined DiffMS (∼3M)
Combined DiffMS (∼3M)
MassSpecGym (∼17k)

From MIST
Ground truth
Ground truth

30.97%
46.00%
0.00%

0.68
0.89
0.18

40.04%
59.28%
0.00%

0.74
0.93
0.19

Figure 3: Tanimoto Similarity of thresholded MIST fingerprint and Top-1 structure from M OL F ORGE, both
compared to the ground truth fingerprint. Orange points indicate an exact structural match, and points above
(below) the green parity line show predicted structures that are better (worse) than the thresholded fingerprint.

MIST also takes in annotations, in terms of chemical formulae, of peaks in the mass spectrum. In
our study, removing annotations from the mass spectra (i.e. not supplying chemical formulae of the
peaks into MIST) results in a decrease in Tanimoto Similarity (as calculated between fingerprint
of the ground truth molecule and fingerprint predicted by MIST) from 0.731 to 0.627. Hence, peak
annotations of the mass spectra are also essential for the good performance of our proposed pipeline.
4.3

Performance of MolForge as fingerprint decoder

We trained M OL F ORGE with the same dataset used in D IFF MS and its baselines, which contains
more than two million compounds. This allowed it to better capture the distribution of SMILES
strings compared to just using the MassSpecGym dataset, which has only ∼17k compounds. Without
these additional data, M OL F ORGE fails to generate any structures from the test set correctly (see
Table 2). The increase in performance with larger dataset size is expected due to data scaling laws [8].
Hence, we consider this step to be vital.
It is also important to note that the performance of M OL F ORGE with ground truth fingerprints as
input is very high with 59% top-10 accuracy (in terms of molecule structural matches) in the test set.
This shows that M OL F ORGE is a good model for the inverse problem of decoding fingerprints to
structure, and why it is a vital component of our pipeline.
Additionally, instead of passing the probability of each bit in the fingerprint, thresholding the
probabilities as a step function helps focus the decoder on the presence of substructures. M OL F ORGE
only takes in the indices of the fingerprint that has a value of 1, representing the presence of probable
substructures in the fingerprint. This makes it capable of recovering accurate molecular structures
even when the fingerprints predicted by MIST only moderately resembles the ground truth in terms
of Tanimoto similarity, as shown in Figure 3. M OL F ORGE predicts structures that has a better match
to the ground truth in terms of Tanimoto similarity, compared to the thresholded fingerprint it was
given as input, at 27% of the test set for t = 0.5 and 36% for a prior-adjusted threshold of t = 0.172.
Hence, the elevated performance of M OL F ORGE with ground truth fingerprints shows that the key
bottleneck in our pipeline is the prediction of fingerprints from mass spectra. The performance of our
4

pipeline is close to the best-case scenario if MIST were to predict fingerprints perfectly, suggesting
room for improvement. Even though the fingerprint predicted by MIST has errors, M OL F ORGE
is able to overcome some of them and generate the correct structure. Further improvements on the
prediction of fingerprints from mass spectra should translate well to better performance in the de
novo molecule generation problem given the well-rounded performance of M OL F ORGE.
4.4

Investigation on using prior-adjusted thresholds

The prior-adjusted threshold method calculates the prior distribution of on-bits in the training set
and selects a threshold such that the proportion of thresholded logits matches this prior. For the
MassSpecGym training set, the proportion of on-bits is 1.09%. To preserve this proportion, we
determine the logit value corresponding to the top 1.09% of logits, which equals 0.172. Accordingly,
we set the threshold to t = 0.172.
As shown in Table 1, using this prior-adjusted threshold results in a slight boost in performance, with
the top-1 accuracy of 31% and top-10 accuracy of 40%. This is mainly attributed to the better balance
of false positives and false negatives in the thresholded fingerprint. Hence, the indices passed to
M OL F ORGE would be more similar to the ground truth which results in the increased performance.
We recommend using the prior-adjusted threshold value when using this pipeline.

5

Relevant Literature

De novo molecule generation from mass spectra. The problem of de novo molecular generation
from mass spectrometry data, also referred to as the inverse problem of structural elucidation from
mass spectra, has garnered significant attention in computational chemistry and machine learning.
Early approaches leveraged machine learning techniques to map mass spectra to molecular structures
[11, 17]. The MassSpecGym benchmark [2] represents one of the most comprehensive open-source
datasets for tandem mass spectrometry-based structure elucidation to compare across models. More
recently, D IFF MS [1], a generative diffusion model, has been proposed to solve this problem.
The method first employs MIST [5] to predict molecular fingerprints from mass spectra. These
fingerprints are then used as conditional inputs to a graph diffusion model that generates candidate
molecular structures as graphs. This two-stage framework enables D IFF MS to achieve a test-set
accuracy of 2.30% on the MassSpecGym benchmark.
Encoding mass spectra to molecular fingerprints. DeepEI [7] also encodes a mass spectrum,
but does not fully generate a molecular fingerprint. CSI:FingerID [4] uses a fragmentation tree to
generate plausible fragments. However, this fingerprint type is different from Morgan fingerprints,
and thus is not as extensible for usage with other fingerprint decoder models.
Decoding molecular fingerprints to molecular structure. D IFF MS [1], as stated earlier, contains
a conditional graph diffusion model that takes in a fingerprint representation to predict molecule
structure. Other fingerprint-to-structure models can be paired with MIST. Neuraldecipher [10] uses
a standard feed-forward model to decode the molecular fingerprint, while MSNovelist [15] uses a
recurrent neural network with long short-term memory architecture.

6

Conclusion

Various two-stage pipelines have been proposed for solving the de novo molecular generation problem
from mass spectra, comprising (1) encoding mass spectra into molecular fingerprints, followed by
(2) decoding these fingerprints into molecular structures. Leveraging external chemical datasets
significantly enhances performance in both stages, especially so for the decoder. This stems from the
limited availability of labeled mass spectra, in contrast to the abundance of molecular fingerprint data
that can be exploited during decoder training. Notably, substituting the decoder with M OL F ORGE,
a seemingly modest architectural change, yields a tenfold improvement over prior state-of-the-art,
highlighting the how choosing the right decoder is critical. M OL F ORGE uses on-bit indices of the
fingerprint as input, and we show how using a prior-adjusted threshold leads to further improvement
compared to a predetermined value. We position this pipeline as a strong baseline for future work in
de novo structure prediction from mass spectra, and highlight the spectra-to-fingerprint encoding step
as a promising direction for further investigation.

5

References
[1] B OHDE, Montgomery ; M ANJREKAR, Mrunali ; WANG, Runzhong ; J I, Shuiwang ; C OLEY,
Connor W.: DiffMS: Diffusion Generation of Molecules Conditioned on Mass Spectra. Mai
2025
[2] B USHUIEV, Roman ; B USHUIEV, Anton ; DE J ONGE, Niek F. ; YOUNG, Adamo ;
K RETSCHMER, Fleming ; S AMUSEVICH, Raman ; H EIRMAN, Janne ; WANG, Fei ; Z HANG,
Luke ; D ÜHRKOP, Kai ; L UDWIG, Marcus ; H AUPT, Nils A. ; K ALIA, Apurva ; B RUNGS,
Corinna ; S CHMID, Robin ; G REINER, Russell ; WANG, Bo ; W ISHART, David S. ; L IU,
Li-Ping ; ROUSU, Juho ; B ITTREMIEUX, Wout ; ROST, Hannes ; M AK, Tytus D. ; H ASSOUN,
Soha ; H UBER, Florian ; VAN DER H OOFT, Justin J. ; S TRAVS, Michael A. ; B ÖCKER, Sebastian ; S IVIC, Josef ; P LUSKAL, Tomáš: MassSpecGym: A Benchmark for the Discovery and
Identification of Molecules. In: G LOBERSON, A. (Hrsg.) ; M ACKEY, L. (Hrsg.) ; B ELGRAVE,
D. (Hrsg.) ; FAN, A. (Hrsg.) ; PAQUET, U. (Hrsg.) ; T OMCZAK, J. (Hrsg.) ; Z HANG, C. (Hrsg.):
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems Bd. 37, Curran Associates, Inc., 2024,
S. 110010–110027
[3] CCTE, EPA: Distributed Structure-Searchable Toxicity (DSSTox) Database. 2024
[4] D ÜHRKOP, Kai ; S HEN, Huibin ; M EUSEL, Marvin ; ROUSU, Juho ; B ÖCKER, Sebastian:
Searching Molecular Structure Databases with Tandem Mass Spectra Using CSI:FingerID. In:
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112 (2015), Oktober, Nr. 41, S. 12580–12585.
– ISSN 0027-8424, 1091-6490
[5] G OLDMAN, Samuel ; W OHLWEND, Jeremy ; S TRAŽAR, Martin ; H AROUSH, Guy ; X AVIER,
Ramnik J. ; C OLEY, Connor W.: Annotating Metabolite Mass Spectra with Domain-Inspired
Chemical Formula Transformers. In: Nature Machine Intelligence 5 (2023), August, Nr. 9,
S. 965–979. – ISSN 2522-5839
[6] H ELLER, Stephen R. ; M C NAUGHT, Alan ; P LETNEV, Igor ; S TEIN, Stephen ; T CHEKHOVSKOI,
Dmitrii: InChI, the IUPAC International Chemical Identifier. In: Journal of Cheminformatics 7
(2015), Dezember, Nr. 1. – ISSN 1758-2946
[7] J I, Hongchao ; D ENG, Hanzi ; L U, Hongmei ; Z HANG, Zhimin: Predicting a Molecular
Fingerprint from an Electron Ionization Mass Spectrum with Deep Neural Networks. In:
Analytical Chemistry 92 (2020), Juli, Nr. 13, S. 8649–8653. – ISSN 1520-6882
[8] K APLAN, Jared ; M C C ANDLISH, Sam ; H ENIGHAN, Tom ; B ROWN, Tom B. ; C HESS,
Benjamin ; C HILD, Rewon ; G RAY, Scott ; R ADFORD, Alec ; W U, Jeffrey ; A MODEI, Dario:
Scaling Laws for Neural Language Models. Januar 2020
[9] K RETSCHMER, Fleming ; S EIPP, Jan ; L UDWIG, Marcus ; K LAU, Gunnar W. ; B ÖCKER,
Sebastian: Coverage Bias in Small Molecule Machine Learning. In: Nature Communications
16 (2025), Januar, Nr. 1. – ISSN 2041-1723
[10] L E, Tuan ; W INTER, Robin ; N OÉ, Frank ; C LEVERT, Djork-Arné: Neuraldecipher – ReverseEngineering Extended-Connectivity Fingerprints (ECFPs) to Their Molecular Structures. In:
Chemical Science 11 (2020), Nr. 38, S. 10378–10389. – ISSN 2041-6520, 2041-6539
[11] L IM, Jing ; W ONG, Joshua ; W ONG, Minn X. ; TAN, Lee Han E. ; C HIEU, Hai L. ; C HOO,
Davin ; N EO, Neng Kai N.: Chemical Structure Elucidation from Mass Spectrometry by
Matching Substructures. November 2018
[12] M ORGAN, H. L.: The Generation of a Unique Machine Description for Chemical Structures-A
Technique Developed at Chemical Abstracts Service. In: Journal of Chemical Documentation
5 (1965), Mai, Nr. 2, S. 107–113. – ISSN 0021-9576, 1541-5732
[13] P OLYKOVSKIY, Daniil ; Z HEBRAK, Alexander ; S ANCHEZ -L ENGELING, Benjamin ; G OLO VANOV , Sergey ; TATANOV , Oktai ; B ELYAEV , Stanislav ; K URBANOV , Rauf ; A RTAMONOV ,
Aleksey ; A LADINSKIY, Vladimir ; V ESELOV, Mark ; K ADURIN, Artur ; J OHANSSON, Simon ; C HEN, Hongming ; N IKOLENKO, Sergey ; A SPURU -G UZIK, Alan ; Z HAVORONKOV,
Alex: Molecular Sets (MOSES): A Benchmarking Platform for Molecular Generation Models.
Oktober 2020
6

[14] S OROKINA, Maria ; M ERSEBURGER, Peter ; R AJAN, Kohulan ; Y IRIK, Mehmet A. ; S TEIN BECK , Christoph: COCONUT Online: Collection of Open Natural Products Database. In:
Journal of Cheminformatics 13 (2021), Dezember, Nr. 1, S. 2. – ISSN 1758-2946
[15] S TRAVS, Michael A. ; D ÜHRKOP, Kai ; B ÖCKER, Sebastian ; Z AMBONI, Nicola: MSNovelist:
De Novo Structure Generation from Mass Spectra. In: Nature Methods 19 (2022), Juli, Nr. 7,
S. 865–870. – ISSN 1548-7091, 1548-7105
[16] U CAK, Umit V. ; A SHYRMAMATOV, Islambek ; L EE, Juyong: Reconstruction of Lossless
Molecular Representations from Fingerprints. In: Journal of Cheminformatics 15 (2023),
Februar, Nr. 1. – ISSN 1758-2946
[17] W EI, Jennifer N. ; B ELANGER, David ; A DAMS, Ryan P. ; S CULLEY, D: Rapid Prediction of
Electron–Ionization Mass Spectrometry Using Neural Networks. In: ACS central science 5
(2019), Nr. 4, S. 700–708
[18] W EININGER, David: SMILES, a Chemical Language and Information System. 1. Introduction
to Methodology and Encoding Rules. In: Journal of Chemical Information and Computer
Sciences 28 (1988), Februar, Nr. 1, S. 31–36. – ISSN 0095-2338, 1520-5142
[19] W ISHART, David S. ; G UO, AnChi ; O LER, Eponine ; WANG, Fei ; A NJUM, Afia ; P ETERS,
Harrison ; D IZON, Raynard ; S AYEEDA, Zinat ; T IAN, Siyang ; L EE, Brian L. ; B ERJANSKII,
Mark ; M AH, Robert ; YAMAMOTO, Mai ; J OVEL, Juan ; T ORRES -C ALZADA, Claudia ;
H IEBERT-G IESBRECHT, Mickel ; L UI, Vicki W. ; VARSHAVI, Dorna ; VARSHAVI, Dorsa ;
A LLEN, Dana ; A RNDT, David ; K HETARPAL, Nitya ; S IVAKUMARAN, Aadhavya ; H ARFORD,
Karxena ; S ANFORD, Selena ; Y EE, Kristen ; C AO, Xuan ; B UDINSKI, Zachary ; L IIGAND,
Jaanus ; Z HANG, Lun ; Z HENG, Jiamin ; M ANDAL, Rupasri ; K ARU, Naama ; DAMBROVA,
Maija ; S CHIÖTH, Helgi B. ; G REINER, Russell ; G AUTAM, Vasuk: HMDB 5.0: The Human
Metabolome Database for 2022. In: Nucleic Acids Research 50 (2022), Januar, Nr. D1,
S. D622–D631. – ISSN 0305-1048, 1362-4962

A

Problem Statement and Definitions

We adopt the problem definition for de novo molecule generation from MassSpecGym [2], which
involves predicting a molecule’s structure G given its corresponding mass spectrum M S. The
molecule is modeled as a graph G = (V, E), where the N atoms are represented by the set of vertices
V ∈ VN , and the M chemical bonds are represented by the set of edges E ∈ EM . The mass spectrum
M S consists of intensity values Y ∈ (0, 1] associated with mass-to-charge ratios X ∈ R+ .
This paper focuses on de novo molecule generation with the chemical formula provided as an
additional input, which is also part of the MassSpecGym benchmark. In this setting, the chemical
formula, which corresponds to the atom set V , is known in advance. The task is to predict the
molecular structure G given its mass spectrum M S and chemical formula.
Importantly, as this problem is de novo in nature, algorithms attempting to solve this problem need to
generate molecular structures without any reference libraries.
A.1

Metrics

Top-k metrics. The de novo molecule generation problem can be formulated as predicting a set of k
b k = {G
b1 , . . . , G
b k }, rather than a single predicted graph G.
b Especially since mass
candidate graphs G
spectra may not contain enough information to predict structures accurately, this formulation better
reflects the uncertainty and complexity of molecule generation from mass spectra.
b k , we compare them against the groundTo evaluate the quality of the predicted molecular graphs G
truth graph G using three metrics, following MassSpecGym [2]. As a summary:
1. Top-k accuracy.
bk }
Top-k accuracy: 1{G ∈ G
7

(1)

is the presence of the ground truth molecule within the top-k predictions of the model. This
is averaged over all test examples. Here, 1{·} is the indicator function, which returns 1 if
the condition is true and 0 otherwise.
2. Maximum Common Edge Subgraph (MCES) metric. [9]
b
Top-k MCES: min MCES(G, G),

(2)

b G
bk
G∈

The MCES metric measures the graph edit distance, or the number of edges that need to
b such that ground truth G is also a subgraph of it. We
be added to candidate structure G
report the best similarity score among the top-k candidates as averaged across the test set. A
score of 0 indicates identical graphs, while larger values correspond to greater structural
dissimilarity.
3. Tanimoto similarity, computed on the Morgan fingerprints of the molecules [12].
b
Top-k Tanimoto: max Tanimoto(G, G).

(3)

b G
bk
G∈

This score reflects how well the generated molecule captures true molecular substructures.
Tanimoto similarity ranges from 0 to 1, with 1 indicating perfect structural similarity (but
not exact similarity, due to the possibility of fingerprint collisions).
A.2

Cheminformatics terms

While exact graph matching can be used to check if the ground truth and predicted molecules match,
the cheminformatics domain has also developed other representations for this. In this paper, we focus
on using InChIs [6] as textual representations of molecules. InChIs are guaranteed to be unique for
each structure and thus can be used as a substitute to test for molecule similarity. SMILES strings
[18], though a common text representation of molecules, are not used for comparison, as multiple
SMILES strings can be used to refer to the same molecule.
We also use molecular fingerprints as a representation of a molecule, which are usually 2048 or
4096 bits in length. Molecular fingerprints are bit vectors that represent the presence (‘1’ / on-bit) or
absence (‘0’ / off-bit) of substructures within a molecule. One of the most commonly used fingerprints
is a Morgan fingerprint [12].

B

Implementation Details

Open source implementations are available for the models (MIST 1 , M OL F ORGE 2 ) in our pipeline.
We have generally followed the default settings for these models, and further modifications are
explained in this section.
MIST: We use pretrained MIST models from D IFF MS 3 , and base our implementations from the
D IFF MS code and annotated MassSpecGym data. We proceed with the inference run with the MIST
models pretrained for MassSpecGym, and collect the output of the encoder (MIST model) in
test_step as the fingerprint outputs. We extracted all indices for which its corresponding bit is at
least the threshold value.
MolForge: The training data was formatted following the examples in the M OL F ORGE Github
repository, in which SMILES strings were split into tokens (i.e. atoms, brackets or numbers) and
fingerprints were generated using the Morgan fingerprint generator from RDK IT 4 with a radius of
2 and fingerprint size of 4096 bits. We first train the tokenizer for this model with the additional
training data as provided in D IFF MS. Following which, we trained the model on the same dataset
with a learning rate of 5e-4 and batch size of 128 for 6 epochs. This took about 3 days to run with a
Nvidia A40 GPU. For inference, we used the beam search code from M OL F ORGE with a beam size
of 10.
1

https://github.com/samgoldman97/mist/tree/main_v2
https://github.com/knu-lcbc/MolForge
3
https://zenodo.org/records/15122968
4
https://www.rdkit.org
2

8

